Pay For Performance and Beyond

Prize Lecture, December 8, 2016 by Bengt Holmström *

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

n this lecture, I will talk about my work on incentive contracts, especially incen- tives related to moral hazard. I will provide a narrative of my intellectual jour- ney from models narrowly focused on pay for performance to models that see the scope of the incentive problem in much broader terms featuring multitask- ing employees and rms making extensive use of non nancial instruments in designing coherent incentive systems.

I will highlight the key moments of this journey, including misunderstand- ings as well as new insights. e former are o en precursors to the latter. In the process, I hope to convey a sense of how I work with models. ere is no one right way about theorizing, but I believe it is important to develop a consistent style with which one is comfortable.

I begin with a brief account of the roundabout way in which I became an economist. It reveals the origins of my interest in incentive problems and accounts for my life long association with business practice, something that has strongly in uenced my research and style of work.

*   I want to thank George Baker, Robert Gibbons, Oliver Hart, Paul Milgrom, Canice Prendergast, John Roberts and Jean Tirole for years of fruitful discussions on the topic of this lecture and Jonathan Day, Dale Delitis, Robert Gibbons, Gary Gorton, Parag Pathak, Alp Simsek, David Warsh and especially Iván Werning for comments on various versions of the paper.

413

I

-----------------------------------------------------Page 1-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
414                                         The Nobel Prizes

I did not plan to become an academic. A er graduating from the University of Helsinki, I got a job with Ahlstrom as a corporate planner. Ahlstrom was one of the ten biggest companies in Finland at the time, a large conglomerate with 20–30 factories around the country. e company took pride in staying abreast of recent advances in management. I was hired to implement a linear programming model that had recently been built to help management with long-term strategic planning. It was a huge model with thousands of variables and hundreds of con- straints, describing all the factories within the conglomerate, their production activities, investment plans and nancial and technological interdependencies. e company had invested heavily in mainframe computers and had high hopes that the planning model was going to be one of the payo s from such investments. e most urgent task for me was to arrange the data collection process. I began visiting factories to discuss the data requirements. It did not take me very long to see that the people providing the data were deeply suspicious of a 23-year- old mathematician sent from headquarters to collect data for a planning model that would advise top management on how to spend scarce resources for invest- ments. ey wanted to know what numbers to feed into my “black box” model to ensure that their own plans for their factory would receive the appropriate amount of resources. Data were forthcoming slowly and hesitantly.

A er some months, I came to the conclusion that the whole enterprise was misguided. Even assuming the best of intentions at the factory level, reasonable data were going to be very di cult to obtain. e quality of the data varied a lot and disagreements about them o en surfaced, especially in cases where facto- ries were interconnected. Also, I grew increasingly concerned about gaming. e integrity of the data therefore seemed questionable for technical as well as

strategic reasons.

I suggested that we give up on the grand project and that I instead would focus on two things: (i) smaller models that could help each factory improve its own planning process and (ii) try to deal with incentive problems in investment planning at the corporate level.

My rst recommendation met with some success. I worked out small linear programs for factories that seemed amenable to such models. I used these models as an economist would: I tried to replicate what the factories were doing. is involved a lot of back-and-forth. I would get the data, run the linear program and then go tell the factory what the program was proposing as the “optimal solution” given their data and, importantly, why the model was proposing the solution it did. is last step—explaining how the model was thinking—was the key. It made clear that I was not there to recommend a mechanical solution; I was there to understand what may be missing in my model speci cation. is

-----------------------------------------------------Page 2-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              415

lesson, on the usefulness of small models and of listening to them, would stick with me throughout my academic career.

My second recommendation to think creatively about the incentive problems surrounding investment planning was a failure. I made all the mistakes one is likely to make when one tries to design incentives for the rst time. My thinking was guided by two principles: factories should pay for their borrowing and the price should be obtained at least partly through a market-like process so that funds would be allocated e ciently. In today’s language, I was suggesting that we “bring the market inside the rm” in order to allocate funds to the factories. Today, I know better. As I will try to explain, one of the main lessons from working on incentive problems for 25 years is, that within rms, high-powered nancial incentives can be very dysfunctional and attempts to bring the market inside the rm are generally misguided. Typically, it is best to avoid high-pow- ered incentives and sometimes not use pay-for-performance at all. e recent scandal at Wells Fargo explains the reason (Tayan 2016). Monetary incentives were powerful but misaligned and led some managers to sell phony accounts to enhance their bonuses. Kerr’s (1975) famous article “ e Folly of Hoping for A, While Paying for B” could have served as a warning, though the article is rather thin on suggestions for providing alternative ways to provide incentives. I hope to show that our understanding of incentive problems has advanced quite a bit since the days Kerr published his article. In order to appreciate the progress of thought, I will start with the early literature on principal-agent models.

I. THE PRINCIPAL AGENT PROBLEM A. The One-Dimensional “E ort” Model

Early contributions to the principal-agent literature on moral hazard include Wilson (1969), Spence and Zeckhauser (1971), Ross (1973), Stiglitz (1975) and Mirrlees ([1975]1999). Wilson and Ross asked under what conditions the prin- cipal’s and the agent’s preferences over risky lotteries will be perfectly aligned when sharing risk optimally. is is possible if the principal’s and the agent’s utility functions are such that linear risk sharing is optimal. Spence and Zeck- hauser (1971) studied insurance contracts under varying information assump- tions including the case of moral hazard as well as adverse selection. Mirrlees was the rst to study in generality the case where the agent provides a service to the principal and the issue is how to motivate the agent to work dili- gently. e agent’s action is o en referred to as “e ort” though this interpretation should not be taken literally. e model applies in a wide range of situations: an

-----------------------------------------------------Page 3-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
416                                         The Nobel Prizes

employee working for a manager; a lawyer serving a client; a doctor treating a patient; or a CEO serving the board of a company, to name a few.

ere are two challenges when designing an optimal incentive scheme for e ort. First, the agent nds it privately costly to provide the service, at least beyond some base level, so a nancial inducement based on performance is needed. But performance is imperfectly measured, so variable pay will induce risk on the agent. Since the agent is risk averse, there is a trade-o between risk and incentive. How should it be optimally solved?

One could approach this problem by studying simple incentive schemes such as a linear incentive in addition to a xed wage, or a bonus for performance beyond some minimum standard. 1    e problem with using a particular func- tional form is that the analysis will not tell us why di erent incentives are used in di erent contexts. Also, xing the form of the incentive pay may silence trade- o s that are essential for understanding the underlying incentive problem. is makes it valuable to study the problem without functional restrictions. Let me turn to a simple, generic formulation of the principal-agent relation- ship. e agent chooses an unobserved level of e ort e . e agent’s choice of e ort leads to a payo x = x ( e , ), where captures random external factors such as market conditions or measurement errors that the agent does not control directly. I will o en work with the additive speci cation x = e + .

As Mirrlees ([1975] 1999) noted, it is technically convenient and more ele- gant to view the agent as choosing a distribution over x . For a xed choice e , the distribution over induces a distribution over x , denoted F ( x | e ). is eliminates and gives a simpler and, as we will see, much more informative characterization, though the explicit dependence on can be helpful for thinking about particular contexts. 2

Before the agent acts, the principal o ers the agent an incentive contract s , which pays the agent s ( x ) when the realized payo is x . e principal keeps the residual x − s ( x ). e utilities of the agent and the principal are, respectively, U = u ( s ( x )) − c ( e ) and V = x − s ( x ), so the principal is risk neutral and the agent (in general) risk-averse. e agent’s utility function is additively separable, which is restrictive but commonly used.

e principal and the agent are symmetrically informed at the time they sign the contract (this is what makes the problem one of moral hazard). In particular, they know each other’s utility functions and hold the same beliefs about the dis- tributions F ( x | e ). e principal can therefore forecast the agent’s behavior given s ( x ) even though she cannot observe the agent’s choice of e ort.

e incentive scheme s ( x ) must provide the agent an expected utility that is at least as high as the agent can get elsewhere. e agent’s participation requires

-----------------------------------------------------Page 4-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              417

the principal to consider the impact s ( x ) has on the agent’s expected utility. e agent’s burden from extra risk and extra e ort is ultimately borne by the princi- pal. Finding the best contract is therefore a shared interest in the model (but not necessarily in practice).

To determine the principal’s optimal o er, it is useful to think of the principal as proposing an e ort level e along with an incentive scheme s ( x ) such that the agent is happy to choose e , that is, s ( x ) and e are incentive compatible. is leads to the following program for nding the optimal pair { s ( x ), e }:

Max E [ x − s ( x ) | e ], subject to               (1) E [ u ( s ( x )) − c ( e ) | e ] ≥ E [ u ( s ( x )) − c ( e ) | e ] for e ≠ e , and       (2)

E [ u ( s ( x )) − c ( e ) | e ] ≥ U .                (3) e rst constraint assures that e is optimal for the agent. e second con- straint guarantees that the agent gets at least his reservation utility U if he chooses e and therefore will accept the contract. I will assume that there exists an optimal solution to this program. 3

B. First-best Cases

Before going on to analyze the optimal solution to the second-best program (1)–(3) it is useful to discuss some cases where the optimal solution coincides with the rst-best solution that obtains when the incentive constraint (2) can be dropped, because any e ort level e can be enforced at no cost. Because the principal is risk neutral, the rst-best e ort, denoted e FB , maximizes E ( x | e ) − c ( e ).

A rst-best solution can be achieved in three cases:

I.    ere is no uncertainty. II.    e agent is risk neutral.

III.    e distribution has moving support.

If (I) holds, the agent will choose e FB if he is paid the xed wage w = u –1 ( U + c ( e FB )) whenever x ≥ e FB and nothing otherwise. e wage w is just su cient to match the agent’s reservation utility U . If (II) holds, the principal can rent the technology to the agent by setting s ( x ) = x − E ( x | e FB ) + w . As a risk- neutral residual claimant the agent will choose e FB and will earn his reservation utility U as in case (I).

e third case is the most interesting and also hints at the way the model reasons. For concreteness, suppose x = e + with uniformly distributed on [0,

-----------------------------------------------------Page 5-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
418                                         The Nobel Prizes

1]. is corresponds to the agent choosing any uniform distribution [ e , e + 1] at cost c ( e ). e density of a uniform distribution looks like a box. As e varies the box moves to the right. In rst best, the agent should receive a constant payment if he chooses the rst-best level of e ort e FB . is can be implemented by paying the agent a xed wage if the observed outcome x ≥ e FB and something low enough (a punishment) if x < e FB . e scheme works, because two conditions hold: (a) the agent can be certain to avoid punishment by choosing the rst-best e ort level and (b) the moving support allows the principal to infer with certainty that an agent is slacking if x < e FB and hence punish him severely enough to make him choose rst best. In the general model, inferences are always imperfect, but will still play a central role in trading o risk versus incentives.

C. Second-best with Two Actions

I proceed to characterize the optimal incentive scheme in the special case where the agent chooses between just two distributions F L and F H . is special case will reveal most of the insights from the basic agency model without having to deal with technical complications. Assume that F H dominates the distribution F L in the sense of rst-order stochastic dominance: for any z , the probability that x > z is higher under F H than F L . is is consistent with assuming that the high distribution is a more costly choice for the agent: c L < c H . As an example, for x = e + and e L < e H , F H rst-order stochastically dominates F L regardless of how is distributed.

Assume that the principal wants to implement H , the other case is uninter- esting since L is optimally implemented with a xed payment. Let   and   be (non-negative) Lagrangian multipliers associated with the incentive compatibil- ity constraint (2) and the participation constraint (3) in the principal’s program (1)–(3). e optimal second-best contract, denoted s H ( x ), is characterized by

u ( s H ( x )) –1 =   + [1 − f L ( x )/ f H ( x )], for every x . 4         (4) Here f L ( x ) and f H ( x ) are the density functions of F L ( x ) and F H ( x ). It is easy to see that both constraints (2) and (3) are binding and therefore   and   are strictly positive. 5

e characterization is simple but informative. First, note that the optimal incentive scheme deviates from rst-best, which pays the agent a xed wage, because the right-hand side varies with x . e reason of course is that the prin- cipal needs to provide an incentive to get the agent to put out high e ort. Second,

-----------------------------------------------------Page 6-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              419

the shape of the optimal incentive scheme only depends on the ratio f H ( x )/ f L ( x ). In statistics, this ratio is known as the likelihood ratio; denote it l ( x ). e likeli- hood ratio at x tells how likely it is that the observed outcome x originated from the distribution H rather than the distribution L . A value higher than 1 speaks in favor of H and a value less than 1 speaks in favor of L .

Denote by s the constant value of s ( x ) that satis es (4) with   = 0. It is the optimal risk sharing contract corresponding to . 6   e second-best contract ( > 0) deviates from optimal risk sharing (the xed payment s ) in a very intui- tive way. e agent is punished when l ( x ) is less than 1, because x is evidence against high e ort. e agent is paid a bonus when l ( x ) is larger than 1 because the evidence is in favor of high e ort. e deviations are bigger the stronger the evidence. So, the second-best scheme is designed as if the principal were making inferences about the agent’s choice, as in statistics. is is quite surpris- ing because in the model the principal knows that the agent is choosing high e ort given the contract she o ers to the agent before the outcome x is observed . So, there is nothing to infer at the time the outcome is realized.

II. THE INFORMATIVENESS PRINCIPLE

e fact that the basic agency model thinks like a statistician is very helpful for understanding its behavior and predictions. An important case is the answer that the model gives to the question: When will an additional signal y be valuable, because it allows the principal to write a better contract?

A. Additional Signals

One might think that if y is su ciently noisy this could swamp the value of any additional information embedded in y . at intuition is wrong. is is easily seen from a minor extension of (4). Let the optimal incentive scheme that imple- ments H using both signals be s H ( x , y ). e characterization of this scheme fol- lows exactly the same steps as that for s H ( x ). e only change we need to make in (4) is to write s H ( x , y ) in place of s H ( x ) and the joint density f i ( x , y ) in place of f i ( x ) for i = L,H . Of course, the Lagrange multipliers will not have the same values if y is valuable.

Considering this variant of (4) we see that if the likelihood ratio l ( x , y ) = f H ( x , y )/ f L ( x , y ) depends on x as well as y , then on the le -hand side the opti- mal solution s H ( x , y ) must depend on both x and y . In this case y is valuable.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 7-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
420                                         The Nobel Prizes

Conversely, if l ( x , y ) does not depend on y the optimal scheme is of the form s H ( x ). We can in that case write

f ( x , y | e ) = g ( x | e ) h ( y | x ), for every x , y and e = L , H .         (5) On the le is the density function for the joint distribution of x and y given e . On the right, the rst term is the conditional density of x given e and the second term the conditional density of y given x . e key is that the conditional density of y does not depend on e and therefore y does not carry any additional information about e (given x ). In words we have the following: Informativeness Principle (Holmström, 1979, Shavell, 1979). —An additional signal y is valuable if and only if it carries additional information about what the agent did given the signal x .

Stated this way the result sounds rather obvious, but it only underscores the value of using the distribution function formulation. 7 One can derive a charac- terization similar to (4) using the state-space formulation x ( e , ), but this char- acterization is hard to interpret because it does not admit a statistical interpreta- tion. e reason is that there are two ways in which y can be informative about e given x . It could be that y provides another direct signal about e ( y = e + , where is noise) or y provides information about ( y = , where and are correlated), which is indirect information about e . Both channels are captured by the single informativeness criterion.

As an illustration of the informativeness principle, consider the use of deductibles in the following insurance setting. An insured can take an action to prevent an accident (a break-in, say). But given that the accident happens, the amount of damage it causes does not depend on the preventive measure taken by the insured. In this case it is optimal to have the insured pay a deductible if the accident happens as an incentive to take precautions, but the insurance company should pay for all the damages, regardless of the amount. is is so because the occurrence of the accident contains all the relevant information about the pre- cautions the agent took. e amount of damage does not add any information about precautions.

B. Implications of the Informativeness Principle

Several implications follow directly from the informativeness principle. 1. Randomization is suboptimal. Conditional on signal x , one does not want to randomize the payment to the agent, because by eliminating the

-----------------------------------------------------Page 8-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              421

randomness without altering the agent’s utility at x gives the principal a higher payo . Randomization may be optimal if the utility function is not separable. 8

2.   Relative performance evaluation (Baiman and Demski, 1980, Holm- ström, 1982) is valuable when the performance of other agents tells something about the external factors a ecting the agent’s performance, since information about paired with measured performance x is infor- mative about the agent’s action e . e important tournament literature initiated by Lazear and Rosen (1981) studies relative performance evalu- ation in great depth.

3.    e controllability principle in accounting states that an agent’s incen- tive should only depend on factors that the agent can control. e use of relative performance evaluation seems to violate this principle, since the agent does not control what other agents do. e proper interpretation of the controllability principle says that an agent should be paid based on the most informative performance measure available. Since x already depends on outside factors (captured by ) anything correlated with can be used to lter out external risk, making the adjusted performance measure more informative.

4.   A su cient statistic in the statistical sense is also su cient for design- ing optimal incentive contracts. For instance, the sample mean drawn independently from a normal distribution with known variance is a suf- cient statistic for mean e ort and can be used to evaluate performance

(Holmström 1982).

5.   Optimal incentive pay will depend on lagged information if valuable

information comes in with delay.

Bebchuk and Fried (2004) among others have argued that CEOs should not be allowed to enjoy windfall gains from favorable macroeconomic conditions. Appealing to the informativeness principle, they advocate the use of relative per- formance evaluation as a way to lter out luck. In many cases this is warranted, but not without quali cations. In a multitasking context relative performance evaluation may distort the agent’s allocation of time and e ort. When agents that work together are being compared against each other, cooperation is harmed or collusion may result (Lazear 1989). Filtering out the e ects of variations in oil prices on the pay of oil executives will in general not be advisable (at least fully) because this would distort investment and other critical decisions.

Longer vesting times, causing lagged information to a ect pay, are unlikely to negatively distort CEO behavior. On the contrary, too short or no vesting

-----------------------------------------------------Page 9-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
422                                         The Nobel Prizes

aggravate problems with short-termism and strategic information release. Allow- ing executives to sell incentive options so quickly in the 1990s was clearly unsound and the current vesting periods may still be too short.

C. Puzzles and Shortcomings

e informativeness principle captures the central logic of the basic one-dimen- sional e ort model. In doing so it helps explain some puzzling features of the basic model and also its main shortcomings.

Surprisingly, the optimal incentive scheme need not be nondecreasing even when x = e + . e reason is that higher output need not signal higher e ort despite rst-order stochastic dominance. e characterization (4) shows that the optimal incentive scheme is always monotone in the likelihood ratio l ( x ) and therefore monotone in x if and only if the likelihood ratio is monotone, in x . Suppose the density has two humps and the di erence e H − e L is small enough so that the two density functions will cross each other more than once (the humps are interlocked). is creates a likelihood ratio that is non-monotone, implying that there exist two values x such that the larger value has a likelihood ratio below one, speaking in favor of low e ort, while the lower value has a likelihood ratio above one suggesting high e ort. In line with inference, the agent is paid more for the lower value than the higher value. One can think of the two humps as two states of nature: bad times and good times. e higher outcome suggests that the good state obtained, but conditional on a good state the evidence suggests that the agent slacked. 9

One can get around this empirically implausible outcome by assuming that the agent can destroy output, in which case only nondecreasing incentives are relevant (Innes 1990). Or one can assume that the likelihood ratio is monotone, a common property of many distribution functions and a frequently used assump- tion in statistics as well as economics (Milgrom 1981). But the characterization in (4) makes clear that the basic e ort model cannot explain common incentive shapes. e universal use of piece rates for instance cannot be due to similar likelihood ratios.

e inference view also helps us understand a troubling example in Mirrlees ([1975]1999). Mirrlees studies the additive production function x = e + where is normally distributed with mean zero and a constant variance. In other words, the agent chooses the mean of a normal distribution with constant variance. He analyzes the problem with a continuous choice of e ort, but the main intuition can be conveyed with just two actions.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 10-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              423

So, assume as before that the agent can choose between low ( L ) or high ( H ) e ort with a (utility) cost-di erential equal to c > 0. Note that the likelihood ratio f L ( x )/ f H ( x ) with the normal distribution goes to in nity as x goes to negative in nity. erefore, the right-hand side of (4), which is supposed to characterize the optimal solution, must be negative for su ciently small values of x , because the values for   and   are strictly positive when high e ort is implemented as discussed earlier. But that is inconsistent with the le -hand side being strictly positive for all x regardless of the function s H ( x ). How can that be? Mirrlees conjectured and proved that this must be because the rst-best solution can be approximated arbitrarily closely, but never achieved. 10

In particular, consider a scheme s ( x ) which pays the agent a xed amount above a cuto z , say, and punishes the agent by a xed amount if x falls below z . If the utility function is unbounded below, Mirrlees shows that one can con- struct a sequence of increasingly lenient standards z , each paired with an increas- ingly harsh punishment that maintains the agent’s incentive to work hard and the agent’s willingness to accept all contracts in the sequence. Furthermore, this sequence can be chosen so that the principal’s expected utility approaches the

rst-best outcome.

One intuition for this paradoxical result is that while one cannot set = 0 in (4), one can approach this characterization by letting   go to zero in a sequence of schemes that assures that the right-hand side stays positive.

e inference logic suggests an intuitive explanation. Despite the way the normal distribution appears to the eye, tail events are extremely informative when one tries to judge whether the observed outcome is consistent with the agent choosing a high rather than a low level of e ort. e likelihood ratio f L ( x )/ f H ( x ) goes to in nity in the lower tail, implying that an outcome far out in the tail is overwhelming evidence against the H distribution. Statistically, the normal distribution is more akin to the moving box example discussed in connection with rst-best outcomes. Punishments in the tail are e ective, because one can be increasingly certain that L was the source.

III. TOWARD A MORE REALISTIC MODEL A. Why Are Incentive Schemes Linear?

One could brush aside Mirrlees’ example as extremely unrealistic (which it is) and proceed to study linear contracts because they are simple and widely used. But this would defeat the purpose of studying general incentives. An additive

-----------------------------------------------------Page 11-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
424                                         The Nobel Prizes

production function with a normal error term is a very natural example to study. e unrealistic solution prods us to look for a more fundamental reason for lin- earity than simplicity and to revisit the assumptions underlying the basic princi- pal-agent model. is led us to the analysis in Holmström and Milgrom (1987). e optimum in the basic model tends to be complex, because there is an imbalance between the agent’s one-dimensional e ort space and the in nite- dimensional control space available to the principal. 11   e principal is therefore able to ne-tune incentives by utilizing every minute piece of information about the agent’s performance resulting in complex schemes.

e bonus scheme that approaches rst-best in Mirrlees’ example works for the same reason. It is nely tuned because the agent is assumed to control only the mean of the normal distribution. If we enrich the agent’s choice space by allowing the agent to observe some information in advance of choosing e ort, the scheme will perform poorly. ink of a salesperson that is paid a discrete bonus at the end of the month if she exceeds a sales target. Suppose she can see her progress over time and adjust her sales e ort accordingly. en, if the month is about to end and she is still far from the sales target, she may try to move potential sales into the next month and get a head start towards next month’s bonus. Or, if she has already made the target, she may do the same. is sort of gaming is common (see Healy 1985 and Oyer 1998). To the extent that such gaming is dysfunctional one should avoid a bonus scheme.

Linear schemes are robust to gaming. Regardless of how much the salesper- son has sold to date, the incentive to sell one more unit is the same. Following this logic, we built a discrete dynamic model where the agent sells one unit or none in each period and chooses e ort in each period based on the full history up to that time. e principal pays the agent at the end of time, basing the payment on the full path of performance. Assuming that the agent has an exponential utility function and e ort manifests itself as an opportunity cost (the cost is nancial), it is optimal to pay the agent the same way in each period—a base pay and a bonus for a sale. 12   e agent’s optimal choice of e ort is also the same in each period, regardless of past history. erefore, the optimal incentive pay at the end of the term is linear in total sales, independently of when sales occurred. 13 e discrete model has a continuous time analog where the agent’s instanta- neous e ort controls the dri of a Brownian motion with xed variance over the time interval [0,1]. e Brownian model can be viewed as the limit of the discrete time model under suitable assumptions. 14 It is optimal for the principal to pay the agent a linear function of the nal position of the process (the aggregate sales) at time 1 and for the agent to choose a constant dri rate (e ort) at each

-----------------------------------------------------Page 12-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              425

instant. Given this, the distribution of the nal position of the process at t = 1 is normally distributed with the agent’s constant choice of e ort determining the mean and the variance being a constant. In other words, we are back to the Mirrlees example x = e + with normally distributed and the agent choosing e . e only di erence is that we can limit the principal’s choice to a linear incentive

scheme with the optimal slope and constant term to be determined.

Remarkably, by enriching the agent’s choice judiciously, we have arrived at a

very simple solution to the Mirrlees problem. 15

B. Extensions and Alternative Approaches

ere is an emerging literature that studies the robustness of linear incentive schemes, where robustness is de ned as the max–min outcome in a larger envi- ronment, which may or may not be known to the principal. Hurwicz and Sha- piro (1978) is the rst paper in this vein showing that the linear 50–50 split widely observed in sharecropping can be rationalized along these lines. Dia- mond (1998), Edmans and Gabaix (2011), Chassang (2013) and Carroll (2015) are more recent variants on this theme. Carroll’s paper is especially elegant and at heart simple enough to be applied in richer economic environments. e paper captures robustness in a strong sense (a guaranteed minimum payo for the principal in a largely unknown environment), but it does not appear as tractable as the Holmström-Milgrom model, at least not yet.

Yuliy Sannikov has greatly advanced and popularized the use of continuous time models to study incentive problems that are both tractable and relevant. Sannikov (2008) solves a general, nonstationary agency problem using powerful techniques from stochastic control theory. ese techniques require a keen eye for nding just the right assumptions to make the analysis go through, but the payo can be high as illustrated in Edmans et al.’s (2012) dynamic model of CEO compensation. e model makes a compelling case for using dynamic incentive accounts that keep funds in escrow and adjust the ratio of debt and equity in response to incoming information. Intuitively, and also in practice, the solution makes a lot of sense. Another example of a continuous time model that resonates with reality is DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006).

C. The Linear Model with One Task

It is straightforward to solve the Mirrlees example with a linear incentive scheme s ( x ) = x + . e agent’s payo is normally distributed with mean e +   and

-----------------------------------------------------Page 13-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
426                                         The Nobel Prizes

variance 2 2 . Given an exponential utility function, the agent’s utility can be written in terms of his certain equivalent:

CE A = e +   − r   2 2 .

e agent has mean-variance preferences where r is the charge for risk bear- ing. e agent chooses e so that the marginal cost of e ort equals the marginal return: c ( e ) = .

e principal is risk neutral so her certain equivalent is:

CE P = (1 − ) e − .

Since the model is one with transferable utility one can rst solve the opti- mal slope   by maximizing the sum of the two certain equivalents CE A + CE P . is gives the maximum total surplus which then is divided between the parties using . Using the rst-order condition for the agent’s choice of e we get then the optimal value of

= [1 + r 2 c ] –1 ,                  (6) where the dependence of c on e has been suppressed ( c is constant if the cost function is quadratic).

e logic of this model is refreshingly simple. e agent works harder the stronger the incentive (higher ). According to (6) the optimal incentive strength always falls between zero (no incentive) and one ( rst-best incentive), because of the risk that the agent has to bear. If the agent is more risk-averse or the perfor- mance measurement is less precise the nancial incentive is weaker. What about c ? From the agent’s rst order condition we get 1/ c = de / d . e derivative measures the agent’s responsiveness to an increased incentive. e agent is more responsive to incentives if the cost function is atter (smaller c ), resulting in a higher commission rate as seen in (6).

e one-dimensional action of the agent and the one-dimensional control of the principal are evenly matched, making this model very well-behaved. One can extend the model in many dimensions. One can study the costs and bene ts of (jointly chosen) di erent projects, production technologies and monitoring systems, for instance, and get simple answers. e most interesting variation in such thought experiments concerns the opportunity cost function c ( e ). ere are many ways in which the principal can vary the agent’s opportunity cost function

-----------------------------------------------------Page 14-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              427

so that the cost of incentives is reduced. is insight was central in initiating my work on multitasking with Paul Milgrom (Holmström and Milgrom 1991, 1994.)

IV. MULTITASKING

Multitasking—the reality that an agent’s job consists of many tasks—led to a major change in mindset and focus. Instead of studying how to get the agent to work hard enough on a single task, attention turned to how the agent allocates his e ort across tasks in a manner that aligns with the principal’s objectives. When tasks are interdependent, the optimal design needs to consider the agent’s incentives in totality. Knowing the agent’s full portfolio of activities—what his authority and responsibilities are—is essential for designing a coherent, balanced solution that takes into account the interdependencies. is is challenging when easy-to-measure and hard-to-measure activities compete for the agent’s attention or if the available performance measures are poorly aligned with the principal’s objectives.

A. Easy versus Hard to Measure Tasks

Consider the case of an agent with two tasks. One task can be perfectly mea- sured—think about quantity sold. e other task is very hard to measure—think about the reputation of the rm. ere may be some measures available for the latter, for instance consumer feedback. But such information is selective and o en biased. People with unhappy sales experiences are likely to complain more o en than people with happy experiences. Some customers may just have had a bad day. And some important customers may not have the time for feedback. All this makes it hard to assess how consumer feedback genuinely translates into valuable reputation down the road.

To be a bit more formal about this, we can use a multitask extension of the linear model (see the Appendix for a general version). Let the performance in each task be separately measured, quantity by x 1 = e 1 and reputation by x 2 = e 2 + 2 . ere is no noise term 1 because I assume that quantity can be measured perfectly. e variance of 2 is larger the noisier the consumer feedback is. Let the principal’s objective be B ( e 1 , e 2 ) = p 1 e 1 + p 2 e 2 , where p 1 and p 2 measure the value of quantity and reputation and suppose for a moment that the agent’s cost function is separable: C ( e 1 , e 2 ) = c 1 ( e 1 ) + c 2 ( e 2 ). In this case the agent’s incen- tives can also be analyzed separately and it is optimal to set each coe cient independently according to the formula for the single-task case. e commission rate on x 1 will be 1 = p 1 , giving rst-best incentives for quantity choice, while

-----------------------------------------------------Page 15-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
428                                         The Nobel Prizes

the commission rate on x 2 will be 2 < p 2 , trading risk against incentives for a second-best outcome.

Now, assume that the tasks are substitutes: the more time the agent spends on one task, the higher is his marginal cost of spending time on the other task (the cross partial C 12 > 0.) In this case it is no longer optimal to give the agent rst-best incentives for choosing quantity ( 1 = p 1 ), because lowering α 1 slightly will at the margin cost nothing in lost value on the rst task, but will be strictly bene cial for providing incentives on the second task. e agent can be given the incentive to supply the same amount of quality for a lower 2 , which reduces the cost of risk. Or alternatively, when 1 is lower the marginal cost of spending time on quality has gone down, making the agent spend more time on that task. Either way, lowering the incentive on quantity is advantageous for the supply of quality, by how much depends on the precision with which quality can be measured and how substitutable the tasks are in the cost function. If the two tasks are perfect substitutes (i.e., the agent just allocates his time between the two tasks so the cost function is C ( e 1 + e 2 )) and attention to quality is essential (this will require a nonlinear bene t function B ), any incentive on quantity will have to be matched by a correspondingly strong incentive on quality so that 1 = 2 . is makes the agent indi erent between spending time on either task and he will choose whatever allocation is best for the principal. e cost is that the incentive for both tasks will have to be reduced because quality is poorly mea- sured. If there is no quality measure at all (i.e., the variance of 2 is in nite) then no incentive for either task is optimal. If C (0) < 0, the agent will still choose a positive level of total e ort.

B. Misalignment and Manipulation

Misalignment is an important variation on the multitask theme (Baker 1992, 2002). It can also be analyzed with the general multitask model.

Suppose again that the principal’s value is B ( e 1 , e 2 ) = p 1 e 1 + p 2 e 2 , and there is just one performance measure x ( e 1 , e 2 ) = g 1 e 1 + g 2 e 2 . Even though there is no uncertainty in the measure, there is a nontrivial incentive problem if the vec- tors p and g are not aligned. For example, suppose x = e 1 + e 2 but B ( e ) = e 1 . e principal only values e ort on the main task 1, but the agent can produce measured output x with e 1 as well as e 2 . e second activity can be interpreted as “manipulation,” which the agent may feel a moral dislike for, but if the prin- cipal pushes too strongly on measured performance x in the hope of getting the agent to work hard on the main task, the agent will engage in manipulation as well. e principal ends up compensating the agent for worthless performance,

-----------------------------------------------------Page 16-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              429

so misalignment causes waste, more so the higher   is. It will be optimal to set < 1, because at   = 1 the marginal cost of reducing   is strictly negative ( e 1 is

rst-best while e 2 is not).

Both variants of multitasking, disparities in measurement errors as well as misalignment between performance measures and the value created, are relevant variants of the general multitask model. It depends on the context which one is more natural to use.

C. “You Get What You Pay For”

Gross manipulation of performance measures was behind the recent Wells Fargo scandal (Tayan 2016). Wells Fargo had avoided the banking scandals associated with the nancial crisis. It was known for prudence in lending, making pro ts by emphasizing its retail banking and customer service. Its branch managers were highly incentivized toward cross-selling: getting its regular banking cus- tomers to buy a range of products, such as credit lines. is part of their banking business had steadily grown and been highly pro table. But continued growth also required new customers and eventually, as the sales goals were tightened (the branch managers’ performance was measured daily), some of the managers opened new accounts for its customers without the customers’ knowledge. Shell accounts were like a second activity in the two-task model described earlier. It improved measured performance and generated bonuses, but since there was no real activity in the accounts this activity generated minuscule pro ts for Wells Fargo ($2.6 million according to Tayan 2016). Shell accounts caused minimal costs for customers (an estimated $2.50 per account), but they were of course illegal. Eventually the scam was discovered, causing the ring or resignation of thousands of employees and eventually also the resignation of Mr. Stumpf, the CEO. Wells Fargo had to pay $185 million in penalties, but the biggest cost by far was the enormous damage to their stellar reputation. 16

e explanations for the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico point in many directions, but the fact that BPX—the exploration arm of BP—was encouraged to be more aggressive in its exploration activity was likely one of the culprits (Garicano and Rayo 2016). Measurable results were pushed hard (implicitly or explicitly), compromising safety. is is an example where there are many activi- ties, some easy to measure (successful exploration), and others not so easy. While safety can be monitored, the intensity of monitoring whether rules are being strictly followed is not easy. Slight delays in service or in repair of faulty parts, especially in the case of backup systems and checks, may appear to carry minimal risk and therefore be subject to trade-o s under pressure.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 17-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
430                                         The Nobel Prizes

Several scandals are associated with the introduction of test-based incen- tives for teachers. One of the most notorious ones occurred in the Atlanta public school system, where the results on the Competency Tests showed irregularities in test scores (extraordinary gains and losses in a single year). An investigation revealed that 44 out of 56 schools cheated on the 2009 Competency Test, and 178 teachers and principals were found guilty of correcting student answers. In 2015, 11 teachers were convicted of racketeering and received sti sentences, including jail terms.

e scandal was an unintended consequence of the No Child Le Behind Act of 2001 and illustrates how good intentions can go wrong. As in the case of Wells Fargo and many similar cases, those guilty of wrong-doing describe their acts as the result of feeling excessive pressure to perform.

e debate about the costs and bene ts of testing and rewarding teachers and schools is ongoing (Neal 2011). e issue is less about cheating and more about other costs such as teaching to the test. Like Stephen Kerr (1975), in his well-known article “On the Folly of Rewarding A, While Hoping for B,” the mul- titasking model warns against aggressive use of rewards for easy-to-measure sub- jects like mathematics at the expense of developing important social and other hard-to-measure skills. But economics goes beyond Kerr’s criticism of rewarding narrow goals by studying the many substitute instruments that rms can use quite e ectively. I will return to these a er summarizing the main lessons from the multitask problem. 17

D. Low-Powered Incentives

A rst lesson from multitasking is that there are two ways to provide incentives for a hard-to-measure activity like supply of quality. e direct way is to pay for measured quality, however poor the measure is. e indirect way is to reduce the incentive on quantity, because this reduces the opportunity cost of providing quality. How e ective the indirect way is depends on how poor the quality mea- sure is and how strongly the two tasks compete with each other for the agent’s time. In the pure time-allocation case the tasks compete directly with each other for the agent’s attention, giving rise to a maximal substitution e ect.

A second lesson is that measurement problems can explain why even per- fectly measured activities may be le without any incentive . e fact that the agent can control a measure well, because the measure is accurate with respect to a task or a subset of tasks, does not imply that it should be used. Sometimes the exact opposite is true. Employees tend to like accounting measures that they can control such as costs, but these measures are o en partial and therefore poorly

-----------------------------------------------------Page 18-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              431

aligned with true value creation, in which case low-powered incentives on these measures are called for.

e third lesson is the most general. Because the opportunity cost of pro- viding incentives for any given task depends on all the incentives for the other tasks, one should always consider the full portfolio of agent tasks when designing incentives .

V. ALTERNATIVE INCENTIVE INSTRUMENTS IN FIRMS

Firms use pay-for-performance schemes rather sparingly. Most employees are on xed pay. Williamson (1985) o ers one explanation: the integrity of performance measures within the rm is weaker than in the market. Multitasking o ers a complementary explanation. Firms have access to many substitutes for pay-for- performance incentives that are not easily accessible through market contract- ing. Foremost among them is the ability to control work through job assign- ments, job designs and a variety of implicit and explicit rules that the rm sets.

A. Rules and Constraints

Consider the case of working at home versus coming to the o ce. 18 Assume that the task that the agent is assigned—one task for simplicity—can be done just as easily at home as in the o ce. e only di erence between the two options is that the agent has other activities that he can engage in at home, activities that provide private bene ts. He can work on other projects at home, do sports, watch TV, rest, play with his kids and so on. We can think of these privately valuable activities as o sets against the cost of working for the principal. e downside is that they reduce the time the agent can spend on the principal’s task. If the agent were paid the value of the output he produces, there would be no problem working from home. As a residual claimant, the agent would do the socially correct calculation on how much time to spend on private activities and how much on the principal’s task. But this contract would also force the agent to bear risk. If risk is costly and the incentive power therefore reduced, the agent’s commission will not fully re ect the marginal value of his activities. e principal’s task will, as a result, become less competitive against the private activities. Suppose each of the private activities can either be shut down or the agent will be free to pursue the activity as he wishes—a zero-one decision for each activity—which activities should be allowed and which ones shut down? Note that allowing private activities is a form of compensation for the agent. So, the principal will also bene t from letting the agent undertake an activity if the

-----------------------------------------------------Page 19-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
432                                         The Nobel Prizes

total surplus is increased in that way. Given a xed commission, if a private task is shut down, the agent will spend the time freed up on the principal’s task. So, whether the task should be shut down is just a question of whether the agent’s chosen amount of a private activity, given the commission rate set by the princi- pal, will be worth more when spent on the principal’s task.

e lower the commission, the less time the agent will spend on the princi- pal’s task and the more on his private tasks. As a result, the marginal value of the principal’s task goes up while the marginal values on the agent’s private tasks go down as the commission rate goes down—the agent is spending too much time on private tasks and too little on the principal’s. So, excluding private activities becomes more important, the lower the commission rate. Constraints on private activities act as substitutes for monetary incentives by increasing the amount of time the agent spends on the principal’s task. In this example, the restrictions are placed in decreasing order of importance of the tasks (as measured by the average private value of tasks).

e agent’s incentive will be weaker if the performance in the main task is measured with lower precision (the variance of is higher) and this will imply that more tasks will be excluded in order to substitute for the weaker incen- tives. 19 Responsibility and freedom to choose co-move as the precision of mea- surement varies. 20

Beyond task restrictions, other instruments can also be important. For exam- ple, bureaucratic rules in organizations are as prevalent as the complaints about them. Bureaucracy is detested because it discourages initiative and innovation. Too o en people fail to see that there is a purpose for most bureaucratic rules. In the rst instance, these rules are not symptoms of an organizational disease, but rather part of the solution to complicated incentive problems. Because pay- for-performance tends to be a costly incentive instrument in the rm, due to problems with performance measurement, bureaucratic rules and restrictions will o en serve as e ective substitutes (Holmström 1989).

Firms also place a number of other restrictions on its employees that limit what they can do. One of the most obvious and universal rules (until recently, perhaps) is the requirement that an employee cannot work for other rms. Another common requirement is that employees have to come to the o ce for set hours. Naturally, these constraints are driven by other considerations, too, but their e ect on employee incentives is nontrivial. B. Job Design

Another important dimension of job design is the distribution of tasks between workers.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 20-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              433

Go back to the two-task case with one agent. One task is perfectly measured (a routine task) and the other task is measured with considerable noise (an inno- vative task). e agent’s cost function depends only on total time spent. I con- cluded that providing low-powered incentives on the routine task is appropriate as an incentive for innovation.

What if one could split the two tasks between two agents? One agent takes care of the routine task while the other specializes on the innovative task. is avoids the tension between routine and innovative tasks. e routine task can be provided with high-powered incentives while the innovative task has low-pow- ered incentives. More generally, one can show (Holmström and Milgrom 1991) that if there is a continuum of tasks (to avoid integer problems) with varying measurement costs, then one should give all the hard-to-measure tasks (de ned by a cuto ) to one agent and the easy-to-measure tasks to the other agent. e hard-to-measure tasks are provided with equal low-powered incentives, while the easy-to-measure tasks are provided with equal high-powered incentives. e more risk-averse agent takes on the low-risk tasks.

More specialization may be one way to deal with the teaching-to-the-test dilemma that is so hotly debated. e idea has been promoted by Neal (2011) based on the multitasking model. ere is of course already a signi cant degree of specialization in teaching, but one may want to increase as well as shi the responsibility of so skills to teachers that specialize in these. ese teachers should not be held responsible for narrow test results.

ere is an important additional lesson hidden in the logic of specialization. In the model discussed, no task is shared because that would require incurring risk for both agents in the given task. If one agent is already incentivized to do half of the project, incurring the risk cost associated with adequate incentives, there is no additional risk cost to have him do the whole task. While this result depends partly on our additive production function and the continuum of tasks, the logic is clear. ere is a xed cost to having a second agent join the project, because both have to be incentivized. is feature is of more general validity and may be one reason for individual responsibility (unity of command). e same principle is relevant for job rotation. One bene t of job rotation is that it o ers a form of relative performance evaluation: having two agents work in the same task gives information about the di culty of the task and this is valuable for evaluating each agent’s performance in line with the informativeness principle. But there is also a downside from an incentive point of view. If perfor- mance information comes in with a lag, one wants to make the incentive of the rst agent depend on the results coming in during the second agent’s shi . is is similar to two agents sharing the same task as discussed above. e rst agent

-----------------------------------------------------Page 21-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
434                                         The Nobel Prizes

is partly incentivized for the later periods because of the delayed information, and from this point of view it would be e cient to let him continue. C. Career Incentives

People want to be appreciated for their work. Career concern models (Holm- ström 1999a; Dewatripont, Jewitt, and Tirole 1999) can capture the desire for appreciation through a dynamic signaling mechanism. Employers are learn- ing about the value of employees from past performance. e value is initially unknown (also for the employee) but will be revealed at least partly over time. Employees try to make a favorable impression because better performance can lead to promotions, higher pay, more status, and other rewards in the future. Career concerns can be expected to be more powerful in rms than in mar- kets, because in rms the employees typically know whom they should impress. Firms can exploit this motivation by indicating what is desired from an employee. In employee surveys, one of the most common complaints is that the employees would like a clearer understanding of what is expected of them. If they only knew what the boss wants, they could work on making a good impression in those dimensions. e craving for appreciation and the desire to impress superiors explains why a mere change in the accounting system can have a big impact on the behavior of employees. Key performance indicators are important because they signal what management wants. Alone or combined with relatively modest bonuses, they can have a surprisingly strong e ect. Putting money behind a mea- sure conveys a stronger message of what is expected. Employees also respond to mission statements as in Dewatripont, Jewitt and Tirole (1999).

Career incentives can be so strong as to obviate any need for nancial incen- tives. In fact, they can be too strong and lead to wasteful pandering and in u- ence activities (Milgrom and Roberts 1988; Holmström and Ricart i Costa 1986; Prendergast 1993). Just like nancial incentives, career incentives can be imbal- anced, because some indicators of performance are more visible and therefore more salient than others. e rm can regulate visibility through the access the employee has to superiors and they can institute pay and promotion practices that do not respond to performance as strongly. Basing salary increases and pro- motions on seniority mutes career incentives that are perceived to be too strong or lead to short-sighted behavior. In general, the rm’s overall hierarchy and its promotion policies are powerful incentive drivers without direct counterparts in the market. 21

e problems of multitasking tend to manifest themselves in much the same way when career concerns are the driver of employee behavior in place of explicit bonuses. is is why the earlier discussion of multitasking assuming

-----------------------------------------------------Page 22-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              435

commissions as incentive instruments provides useful guidance even though commissions are relatively less used by rms.

VI. TWO INCENTIVE SYSTEMS: EMPLOYMENT VERSUS CONTRACTING

e preceding discussion makes clear the point that rms have access to a variety of incentive instruments that can compensate for low-powered pay-for-perfor- mance incentives. In this section I want to highlight two implications for the design and use of incentive systems.

e rst is that structuring e cient incentives within the rm requires a concerted use of all available incentive instruments. is parallels the earlier lesson from multitasking that commissions for all tasks need to be considered in concert. e second point is that incentives in rms and in markets form two logically coherent systems, each with its distinct comparative advantage. In Holmström and Milgrom (1994) we illustrate both points by applying our multitask model to the choice between employment and contracting. We want to explain the ndings of Anderson and Schmittlein (1984) and Anderson (1985), who studied how industrial selling is organized in the electronics industry. Some sales agents work as independent representatives, others as employees. A rm o en uses both forms of sales organization. What determines the choice between the two forms of sales and how are the incentives structured within each alternative? Anderson and Schmittlein nd that the most important measures determin- ing the choice between employment and independent contracting were “the dif- culty of evaluating performance” and “the importance of non-selling activities.” Performance evaluation is di cult for complex sales, while non-selling activities are important when cooperation with other sales agents is desired. Increases in both of these measures made employment more likely. Moreover, independent representatives were compensated entirely by commission and they were allowed to represent other manufacturers, while sales employees were on xed wages and could not sell the products of other manufacturers.

ese ndings can be explained in our standard multi-tasking setting where tasks compete for the sales agent’s attention. e fact that independent agents are free to sell the products of other manufacturers and have strong incentives par- allels the earlier argument about giving an agent the freedom to pursue private tasks if the commission rate is high, but not if the commission rate is low. e di culty of evaluating performance drives the commission rate down, as does the desire to have the agent allocate time to non-selling (cooperative) activities. e model includes two types of selling activities: direct selling, which a ects short-term returns and is in uenced by commissions, and indirect selling which

-----------------------------------------------------Page 23-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
436                                         The Nobel Prizes

increases future sales. We assume that the latter returns can only be transferred through ownership. is is a reduced-form way to introduce a role for owner- ship (Grossman and Hart 1986). An independent sales agent owns the long-term returns; a sales employee does not. e remedy for the loss of long-term incen- tives is to pay the sales employee a xed wage. is makes the sales employee willing to allocate attention to tasks in whatever way the rm desires, at the cost of weaker overall initiatives.

We have, then, two coherent incentive systems as found by Anderson and Schmittlein. An independent contractor (sales representative) owns the long- term returns, is paid high commissions for direct sales and is free to represent other rms. A sales employee does not own the long-term returns, is paid a xed wage, and cannot represent other rms. And consistent with the evidence, employment is favored if direct selling is hard to measure or if non-selling activi- ties are valuable.

Another way to introduce a distinction between employment and contracting is to assume that a rm can restrict the tasks of a sales employee more easily than it can for an independent representative (Holmström 1999b). Both alternatives show that the theory of incentive contracts and the theory of property rights are complementary. Together they can provide a richer perspective on organization.

VII. CONCLUSION

Let me close with a summary of the intellectual journey I have described. When I started to study moral hazard, the main paradigm was the basic one-dimensional e ort model. Despite the seeming simplicity of this model, it behaved in ways that were perplexing at times. e Informativeness Principle revealed the basic logic of the model, providing useful insights about the value of information at the same time as it made clear that the basic model cannot explain the shape of common incentive schemes. 22   is led Paul Milgrom and me to ask why incen- tive schemes are linear. Our willingness to listen to the basic agency model intro- duced us, rather serendipitously, into the world of multitasking, which opened up a rich set of issues and opportunities. e value of low-powered incentives in the context of multitasking explains why rms make so little use of explicit bonuses and instead use alternatives like job design and bureaucratic rules to construct coherent incentive systems that are very distinct from the way incen- tives are designed in the market.

e rm’s comparative advantage relative to markets rests partly with its unique ability to use low-powered incentives combined with constraints. is explains why bringing the market inside the rm is such a misguided idea,

-----------------------------------------------------Page 24-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              437

something I failed to understand at Ahlström and advocates of market-like incentives in rms seem to miss today.

APPENDIX

A1. The General Multitask Lab

In Holmström and Milgrom (1987) we study a multi-dimensional Brownian process in which the agent can choose dri rates independently, at a cost that depends on the rates chosen. is model features an optimal solution that is linear in the di erent dimensions of the Brownian process, and just as in the one-dimensional case the optimal coe cients can be solved through a static model where the agent has several tasks to perform, each one corresponding to one of the dimensions of the Brownian process. In its most general form the static multitask model has the following elements:

•     e agent chooses “inputs” e = ( e 1 ,. . ., e n ).

•     ere are m measures of performance x i = k i ( e ) + i , i = 1,. . ., m . e measurement errors follow a joint normal distribution with mean vector 0 and variance-covariance matrix . e “production” functions k i deter- mine how the agent’s choices map into the mean of the corresponding performance measure.

•     e principal’s bene t function is B ( e ) and the agent’s cost function is C ( e ). •     e optimal incentive scheme is linear: s ( x ) = i i x i + , with commis-

sion rates i and salary .

e agent’s behavior is characterized by the rst order conditions

i   i ∂ k i ( e )/∂ e j   = ∂ C ( e )/∂ e j for every j .

It is readily seen that the misalignment model is a special case of this model. e model also encompasses cases where a risk neutral agent observes a random

signal before acting as in Baker (1992).

See Holmström and Milgrom (1991) for further details on the solution and

variations.

REFERENCES

Anderson, Erin. 1985. “ e Salesperson as Outside Agent or Employee: A Transactions

Cost Analysis,” Marketing Science 4 (3): 234–54.

Anderson, Erin and David C. Schmittlein. 1984. “Integration of the Sales Force: An

Empirical Examination,” RAND Journal of Economics 15 (3): 385–95.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 25-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
438                                         The Nobel Prizes

Baiman, Stanley, and Joel S. Demski. 1980. “Economically Optimal Performance Evaluation and Control Systems,” Journal of Accounting Research 18 (Supplement): 184–220. Baker, George P., 1992. “Incentive Contracts and Performance Measurement,” Journal of

Political Economy 100 (3): 598–614.

Baker, George. 2002. “Distortion and Risk in Optimal Incentive Contracts,” Journal of

Human Resources 37 (4): 728–51.

Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1994. “Subjective Performance Measures in Optimal Incentive Contracts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (4): 1125–56.

Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1999. “Informal Authority in

Organizations,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15 (1): 56–73.

Baker, George, and Bjorn Jorgensen. 2003. “Volatility, Noise and Incentives.” http://www.

bristol.ac.uk/media-library/sites/cmpo/migrated/documents/baker.pdf.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Jesse M. Fried. 2004. Pay without Performance: e Unful lled

Promise of Executive Compensation . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Carroll, Gabriel. 2015. “Robustness and Linear Contracts,” American Economic Review

105 (2): 536–63.

Chaigneau, Pierre, Alex Edmans, and Daniel Gottlieb. 2014. “ e Informativeness Principle Under Limited Liability,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20456.

Chassang, Sylvain. 2013. “Calibrated Incentive Contracts,” Econometrica 81 (5): 1935–71. DeMarzo, Peter M., and Yuliy Sannikov. 2006. “Optimal Security Design and Dynamic Capital Structure in a Continuous-Time Agency Model,” Journal of Finance 61 (6): 2681–2724.

Dewatripont, Mathias, Ian Jewitt, and Jean Tirole. 1999. “ e Economics of Career Concerns, Part II: Application to Missions and Accountability of Government Agencies,” Review of Economic Studies 66 (1): 199–217.

Diamond, Peter. 1998. “Managerial Incentives: On the Near Linearity of Optimal

Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy 106 (5): 931–57.

Edmans, Alex, and Xavier Gabaix. 2011. “Tractability in Incentive Contracting,” Review

of Financial Studies 24 (9): 2865–94.

Edmans, Alex, Xavier Gabaix, Tomasz Sadzik, and Yuliy Sannikov. 2012. “Dynamic CEO

Compensation,” Journal of Finance 67 (5):1603–47.

Garicano, Luis, and Luis Rayo. 2016. “Why Organizations Fail: Models and Cases,” Journal

of Economic Literature 54 (1): 137–92.

Gjesdal, Frøystein. 1982. “Information and Incentives: e Agency Information Problem,”

Review of Economic Studies 49 (3): 373–90.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. 1983. “An Analysis of the Principal-Agent

Problem,” Econometrica 51 (1): 7–45.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. 1986. “ e Costs and Bene ts of Ownership: A eory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy 94 (4): 691–719.

Healy, Paul M. 1985. “ e E ect of Bonus Schemes on Accounting Decisions,” Journal of

Accounting and Economics 7 (1–3): 85–107.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 26-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              439

Hellwig, Martin F., and Klaus M. Schmidt. 2002. “Discrete-Time Approximations of the Holmström-Milgrom Brownian-Motion Model of Intertemporal Incentive Provision,” Econometrica 70 (6): 2225–64.

Holmström, Bengt. 1977. “On Incentives and Control in Organizations,” PhD diss.,

Stanford University.

Holmström, Bengt. 1979. “Moral Hazard and Observability,” Bell Journal of Economics

10 (1): 74–91.

Holmström, Bengt. 1982. “Moral Hazard in Teams,” Bell Journal of Economics 13 (2):

324–40.

Holmström, Bengt. 1989. “Agency Costs and Innovation,” Journal of Economic Behavior

and Organization 12 (3): 305–27.

Holmström, Bengt. 1999a. “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective,”

Review of Economic Studies 66 (1): 169–82.

Holmström, Bengt. 1999b. “ e Firm as a Subeconomy,” Journal of Law, Economics, and

Organization 15 (1): 74–102.

Holmström, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1987. “Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision

of Incentives,” Econometrica 55 (2): 303–28.

Holmström, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 7 : 24–52.

Holmström, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1994. “ e Firm as an Incentive System,” American

Economic Review 84 (4): 972–91.

Holmström, Bengt, and Joan Ricart i Costa. 1986. “Managerial Incentives and Capital

Management,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (4): 835–60.

Hurwicz, Leonid, and Leonard Shapiro. 1978. “Incentive Structures Maximizing Residual

Gain under Incomplete Information,” Bell Journal of Economics 9 (1): 180–91.

Innes, Robert D. 1990. “Limited Liability and Incentive Contracting with Ex-ante Action

Choices,” Journal of Economic eory 52 (1): 45–67.

Kerr, Steven. 1975. “On the Folly of Rewarding A, While Hoping for B,” Academy of

Management Journal 18 (4): 769–83.

Kim, Son Ku. 1995. “E ciency of an Information System in an Agency Model,”

Econometrica 63 (1): 89–102.

Lazear, Edward P.. 1989. “Pay Inequality and Industrial Politics,” Journal of Political

Economy 97 (3): 561–80.

Lazear, Edward P.. 2000. “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic Review

90 (5): 1346–61.

Lazear, Edward P., and Sherwin Rosen. 1981. “Rank Order Tournaments as Optimum

Labor Contracts,” Journal of Political Economy 89 (5): 841–64.

Levin, Jonathan. 2003. “Relational Incentive Contracts,” American Economic Review 93 (3):

835–57.

MacLeod, W. Bentley, and James M. Malcomson. 1988. “Reputation and Hierarchy in

Dynamic Models of Employment,” Journal of Political Economy 96 (4): 832–54.

Milgrom, Paul R. 1981. “Good News and Bad News: Representation eorems and

Applications,” Bell Journal of Economics 12 (2): 380–91.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 27-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
440                                         The Nobel Prizes

Milgrom, Paul R., and John Roberts. 1988. “An Economic Approach to In uence Activities

in Organizations,” American Journal of Sociology 94 : S154–S179.

Milgrom, Paul R., and John Roberts. 1990. “ e Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology, Strategy, and Organization.” American Economic Review 80 (3): 511–28. Milgrom, Paul R. and John Roberts. 1995. “Complementarities and Fit: Strategy, Structure and Organizational Change in Manufacturing,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 19 (2–3): 179–208.

Mirrlees, J. A. (1975) 1999. “ e eory of Moral Hazard and Unobservable Behaviour: Part I,” Review of Economic Studies 66 (1): 3–21. Paper completed 1975, pub- lished 1999.

Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. “Executive Compensation.” In Handbook Of Labor Economics , Vol.3B, edited by Orly Ashenfelter and David Card, 2485–2563. New York: Elsevier. Neal, Derek. 2011. “Design of Performance Pay in Education.” In Handbook of Economics of Education , Vol. 4, edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann, 495–550. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Oyer, Paul. 1998. “Fiscal Year Ends and Nonlinear Incentive Contracts: e E ect on

Business Seasonality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1): 149–85.

Prendergast, Canice. 1993. “A eory of ‘Yes Men’,” American Economic Review 83

(4): 757–70.

Prendergast, Canice. 2002. “ e Tenuous Trade-O between Risk and Incentives,” Journal

of Political Economy 110 (5): 1071–1102.

Rogerson, William P. 1985. “ e First-Order Approach to Principal–Agent Problems,”

Econometrica 53 (6): 1357–67.

Ross, Stephen A. 1973. “ e Economic eory of Agency: e Principal’s Problem,”

American Economic Review 63 (2): 134–39.

Sannikov, Yuliy. 2008. “A Continuous-Time Version of the Principal-Agent Problem,”

Review of Economic Studies 75 (3): 957–84.

Shavell, Steven. 1979. “Risk Sharing and Incentives in the Principal Agent Relationship,”

Bell Journal of Economics 10 (1): 55–73.

Spence, Michael, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1971. “Insurance, Information, and Individual

Action,” American Economic Review 61 (2): 380–87.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1975. “Incentives, Risk, and Information: Notes Towards a eory of

Hierarchy,” Bell Journal of Economics 6 (2): 552–79.

Tayan, Brian. 2016. “ e Wells Fargo Cross-Selling Scandal,” https://www.gsb.stanford

.edu/facultyresearch/publications/wells-fargo-cross-selling-scandal.

Williamson, Oliver E. 1985.    e Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets,

Relational Contracting . New York: Free Press.

Wilson, Robert. 1969. “ e Structure of Incentives for Decentralization under Uncertainty,” In La Decision: Agregation et Dynamique des Ordres de Preference , edited by Georges- éodule Guilbaud, 287–307. Paris: Centre National de la Recherche Scienti que.

NOTES

1. It is common to see companies pay executives a bonus that is linear within a perfor- mance interval, but capped both at the top and the bottom; see Murphy (1999). On

-----------------------------------------------------Page 28-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Pay For Performance and Beyond                              441

the other hand, real estate agents and sales people are paid commissions without an upper bound. Stiglitz’s (1975) paper on sharecropping was the rst to study linear incentives.

2.   Mirrlees ([1975]1999) was the rst to use this formulation. It avoids taking deriva- tives of the endogenous incentive scheme s ( x ), which may well be non-di erentia- ble a priori.

3.   Holmström (1977) proves existence by assuming that s ( x ) has to be chosen from a nite interval. A more instructive existence proof is provided by Grossman and Hart (1983) when the number of outcomes is nite. e key assumption is that probabili- ties have to be strictly bounded away from zero for all action choices.

4.    is equation is the rst-order condition of the Lagrangian with respect to s ( x )

for each x .

5.   If   = 0, the formula implies a constant s H ( x ) in which case the agent would choose L , violating the incentive constraint; so   > 0. If = 0 constraint (2) is slack and the principal can do better by reducing all utility levels by a constant; so   > 0.

6.   Typically s does not correspond to optimal risk sharing for the reservation value of U in the agent’s participation constraint (3), because that problem will have a di er- ent   value. I thank Jörgen Weibull for pointing this out.

7.    e informativeness principle as stated applies when there is just one binding incentive compatability constraint (2). If the agent is indi erent among several actions, there will be a Lagrange multiplier j for each binding incentive constraint j . One can extend the inference interpretation to this situation by evaluating the outcome against the likelihood of the agent randomizing across actions of indif- ference with the Lagrange multipliers providing the (relative) weights of this ran- domized strategy. I am grateful to Paul Milgrom for suggesting this extension. Gjesdal (1982) and Grossman and Hart (1983) provide a weaker ordering using Blackwell’s eorem, which applies regardless of the number of binding incen- tive constraints. For other variations, see Kim (1995) and Chaigneau, Edmans and Gottlieb (2014).

8.   See Gjesdal (1982).

9.   Grossman and Hart (1983) show that the only thing one can say in a general model with discrete outcomes x is that the optimal incentive scheme cannot be such that whenever the agent is paid more, the principal is paid less. ere must be one incre- ment in x such that payments co-move.

10.    is nonexistence result violates Grossman and Hart’s (1983) assumption that prob-

abilities are bounded strictly away from zero.

11.   For every x , there is a separate control s ( x ). e space of all possible functions s is

in nite-dimensional.

12.    e agent’s utility function is u ( m , e ) = 1 − exp[ − r ( m − c ( e ))], where r is the agent’s absolute risk aversion, c ( e ) is the opportunity cost of e ort and m is money. is util- ity function is multiplicatively rather than additively separable. e reason we chose this function is that income levels do not a ect the agent’s choice.

13.    is seems to violate the informativeness principle: the timing of sales is not used. e reason is that it is optimal for the principal to implement a constant action and

for this implementation the timing of sales is irrelevant.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 29-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
442                                         The Nobel Prizes

14. See Holmström and Milgrom (1987) for an intuitive derivation and Hellwig and

Schmidt (2002) for a rigorous analysis.

15. When the agent can observe his progress and make his choice of e ort contingent on the current state, the agent can generate essentially any distribution over the nal position of the process at time 1 using a Brownian bridge (which takes the process from its starting point at t = 0, to an arbitrary point at time t = 1). I am grateful to Michael Harrison for showing me this.

16. So the second activity e 2 actually cost the principal a lot and should therefore enter

B ( e ), but with a big negative sign, re ecting the costs of the reputation loss.

17.    ere are also examples where rms implement aggressive piece rate plans success- fully. Safelite, the dominant rm in the windshield replacement market, is one case in point (Lazear 2000). Lincoln Electric, a welding equipment manufacturer, is another (Milgrom and Roberts 1995). In each case, the introduction of piece rates required a number of matching changes in the organizational structure to avoid the kind of problems described above.

18. A formal treatment of this example can be found in Holmström and Milgrom (1991). 19. Comparative statics results like this one, involving several endogenous variables, will in general require a more complex analysis using monotone methods (see Milgrom and Roberts 1990 and Holmström and Milgrom 1994). Because the exclusion of private tasks only depends on the commission rate, but not directly on the measure- ment error, this case is straightforward. If instead the value of the principal’s task increases, there is a negative direct e ect on exclusion, and it is therefore possible that fewer private tasks will be allowed even though the commission rate goes up. ere are two ways of increasing the agent’s attention to the principal’s task: raise the commission rate or exclude private tasks. Both instruments may be used together. 20. In an important paper, Prendergast (2002) observes that empirically we o en see that higher risk go together with stronger, not weaker, incentives as just described. e reason for changing conclusion is that risk in his model concerns productivity, not measurement error, and there is therefore value in having the agent respond to changing circumstances. is case can be incorporated in the multitask model by replacing the additive output function with a multiplicative one. e agent’s action will then be a contingent strategy and the single measure will be a weighted average of the possible states of nature. Prendergast’s model as well as the multitask model can explain the positive co-movement (see Baker and Jorgensen 2003).

21.    e related literature on relational contracting studies the scope of informal con- tracts that can support rules and practices; see e.g. Levin (2003); MacLeod and Malcomson (1988); and Baker, Gibbons and Murphy (1994, 1999).

22. Much attention was paid to problems with the First-Order Approach—the fact that one cannot in general replace the agent’s incentive compatibility constraint with a rst-order condition. Rogerson (1985) provided a su cient condition for the rst- order approach and e orts continue to re ne his work. But it is evident by now that the one-dimensional e ort model as such has serious shortcomings.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 30-----------------------------------------------------
